In this lesson, we'll check out shared hosting at site ground and how to understand the pricing model.
You'll see how to sign up initially.
Avoid committing to a domain name registration and tour the website control interface called site tools.
By the end of this video, you'll be able to decide if shared hosting is the place to start for you.
Why say ground is a good choice for shared hosting and how to navigate the site tools?
Let's talk about shared hosting and in particular site ground shared hosting, which you can link to
from the resources page, but here if you click Grow Big, you can go ahead and set up your hosting
plan to start with and then choose your payment duration.
As I stated before, you can pay that discounted price for up to three years.
If you pay it all at once and retain that price per month, at which point after that period, you can
either migrate your sites away and change your hosting, or you can go ahead and pay the regular price,
which is actually affordable and within, you know, market standards.
But when you set up with site round, one thing to be aware of.
You don't want to register your new domain through your website host, even if you don't have a domain
already.
You know you could just make up a domain.
Under any name and click Proceed, Oops, I didn't put dot com on dot anything on the end of that.
And so even though it says it's not registered, that is fine.
I would just say no, thank you and we'll be ready to sign up for any period that we want for this price.
And so you can sign up for 12 months, 24 or thirty six now.
Oh, if I sign up for 36, then that's bringing it back up in price.
And so actually the best deal is to sign up for 12 months at this point for that price.
And so you have to pay that upfront.
But in any case, I'm not going to sign up for a new account yet.
I just wanted to show you that that's the way that you sign up with site ground for the discounted period
and you don't want to register a domain name with your website host, since it's a best practice to
register domain names externally with a dedicated registrar versus doing it and being locked in at your
domain name.
And so I'm going to just go ahead and log in instead, and I'll pause the video while I log in to my
site ground account.
Now, one of the great things about Site Ground shared hosting is that they have this custom built control
panel called site tools for any of the websites that you're hosting.
And so I'm going to go through with you just a little bit of a tour about how to use that and where
all the features and the services are located that you would want to use.
And so let's use a client site that I have called Vale sign, and it's it will open the site tool's
interface, where you'll know you'll be able to see all the controls down the left hand side.
And I'll explain a few of the setups that I would recommend when you set up Site Ground is your shared
hosting provider if you're going to use them.
And I'll also explain this message that my domain is not pointing to this site.
Now I've got a we're going to talk about that in a future section of the course about domains and DNS
settings.
I've got my domain for this site hosted at Cloudflare, and the DNS is provided by Cloudflare in their
free service.
And so it just says that the the actual DNS is pointing back to this website, but just not using the
DNS name servers settings here in my site tools.
That's why I'm getting this warning message right here.
But once you have your account set up and you're you're looking at a particular domain name, even if
it's a fake domain name and you're going to be using the temporary one, you could go down and click
install and manage WordPress in order to select it to automatically install WordPress or automatically
install WordPress and WooCommerce.
If you are using an e-commerce WooCommerce plug in, it'll just install the free WooCommerce plug in
for you.
I would recommend if you're going to do WooCommerce and an e-commerce site that you don't use shared
hosting at all.
But I would recommend you'd click click the select button, and you could see that I already have an
installation at the domain name here, and it gives me a few, you know, a little information about
it.
I can do actions like update the password, I can move or delete the application, which is WordPress.
And so this is under the WordPress menu item down here.
One of the things that the grow big and the go geek shared hosting systems offer is staging, which
is an important benefit that I would recommend you look for when you're looking and shopping for WordPress.
Hosting staging is just a place where you can make an exact copy of your website separate from the live
site.
Then you can test things.
You can make changes.
You can do updates to plug ins and themes.
You can do a complete site redesign behind the scenes without affecting the live site.
And then you can just click one button to overwrite the live site with the changes that you've made,
and you can even just use it as an easy testing area for that.
And so that's one of the features in my site ground tools here.
Again, under site, let's just go through and look at where things are located in the site tools in
site ground.
So under site, you've got file manager and we're going to be exploring the files of a WordPress site
and how it connects to the database later in the course in a future lesson.
But just to show you right now this is where a file manager exists, and now you can.
You can also access all of these files, which power WordPress through an FTP program or file transfer
protocol, which would be an external program you can use to connect to your server.
And you can upload and download files to the website if you ever need to.
Again, in a future lesson, we're going to be talking about the files in the database and how they
connect and how you can manage those.
But in ground, the file manager makes it easy to manage and work with files on your website.
Here's where you would set up FTP accounts if you want to use an external FTP program and then my school
is the type of database that we're using with WordPress.
So this is where the databases for this website, the database itself would be located or multiple databases
if you're using them at this under this account name.
And so these are users for the database itself.
phpMyAdmin is a really common program that's installed on hosting servers to help you to manage the
database.
If you do want to get in there and fiddle with it, or make any changes or inspect areas of the database,
and we'll be doing that again later, and you would click this access phpMyAdmin to open up an interface
in your browser so that you can access the database.
This is just a different type of database, a postscript SQL that is not.
Really used with WordPress, so I'll just leave that alone under security.
There are automated backups that you can set up in WordPress and incite ground to backup your WordPress
website daily, so you could see my backups that have been occurring in the background on my behalf.
And over here at the actions button, I could restore the entire website or parts of it files, databases
or even emails from backups that were made days in the past.
And they don't count towards your your server allocation.
And so that's a really nice feature.
That site ground gives that a lot of shared hosts either use an inferior system or don't give you backups
with as robust a system.
And so there's a few more things in here the there's a site scanner in case you're feeling like there's
malware in place.
Enforcing HTTP s is something that is you definitely want to do on your website.
If you don't have that, that that can be installed automatically for your domain here for free, you
shouldn't pay for an SSL certificate.
You should use a Let's Encrypt Free Certificate setup and renewed automatically from your host.
If your host doesn't provide a free SSL certificate for having a secure and encrypted website, then
you shouldn't be using that host.
Yeah, that's just the way it is these days, and that's usually automatically updated and set up through
your hosting company.
And so that's basically it under security.
And then let's just look at speed.
There's caching and there's a Cloudflare connection.
Cloudflare is a recommended DNS provider and also a domain registrar now that I highly recommend.
This is just a connection.
We're using Cloudflare to your site, ground domain and your site ground hosting account.
And because they have this site ground tools here, you can use that to connect.
If you are using Cloudflare, which I'd recommend.
The content delivery network is really what they're connecting here, meaning that wherever in the world
people connect to your web site, you're giving them a fast connection to all your all of your files,
and you're serving them from different locations around the world supplied by Cloudflare.
And so caching is where I mentioned it briefly before in this part of the course.
But a caching is where, you know when WordPress is delivering the pages of your web site instead of
having to create each page on the fly by pulling content from the database, plus files and images from
the the file structure of WordPress and combining them in real time and delivering them to the user.
If those pages aren't often changed, you want to cache your content so that those can be delivered
as a static web page to the user.
Instead, it saves a lot of loads loading time because milliseconds add up to seconds and you want your
website to be delivered as fast as possible.
One of the things that site ground offers is this super casher.
It is a plug in that's called the WP, the S.G., I should say optimizer plug in that comes installed
when you install WordPress.
You can also get it from the WordPress repository just from within any WordPress website.
If you're hosting with site ground, you should use their WP Optimizer plug in and have it enabled and
enable caching.
And it's easy to set up and it just maintains your web site much, much faster in the background loading
for your visitors.
And then under WordPress, you know this is where we were before installing and managing your current
WordPress installations.
Even you can even install a separate installation under a sub directory on an existing domain name,
if you like.
And then there's the staging areas.
You can create staging copies by just naming them, and they exist as a subdomain like staging one Dot
Vale signed account, for example.
If you want to use staging, they do have a migrate or tool that works some of the time to migrate sites
from, you know, externally away from Saigon, back into site ground.
And then there's a couple of other features that are a little more advanced here as far as domains.
Let's finish up by talking about domains.
Lastly, but because this is a shared website account, it does include email hosting, which can be
very convenient.
Of course, it's less expensive because email hosting we'll talk about in the email section of the course.
Email hosting does cost a couple dollars per email address per month, but there are great advantages
to it, and it is a best practice to host email separately from your website.
However, if you're just starting out and you are deciding to use shared.
Hosting, you can set up emails and email accounts for send and receive email through the site ground
tools right here.
And so you could set up emails, for example.
I have a couple of email addresses set up for this business.
And you could say you could see that I have current usage drafts and the quota defined for each of those
email addresses.
And this is the potential problem for hosting email alongside your website if email fills up above its
quota.
It's possible that the website could go down because it's using all of its resources, and so it's a
best practice to host email outside of your website.
But the way you can kind of prevent that from happening is to use a forwarder.
And what I have right now is that the website emails at this domain name they signed are forwarded to
a separate email address that the user is able to check and use.
And so that's just an easy way, as a beginner to set up emails and to start in that way.
And then finally, let's talk about domains under domain names.
Oops.
Let me open that back up under domain names, parked domains or just domains that don't have a website
on them.
There are subdomains, redirects you can you can have a domain name registered in site ground and redirect
it to a second domain.
As if I had say, I had fail dot net as well, and I wanted to just have that redirect straight to Bill
Sinochem.
If anybody browse to that website address, I could use a redirect.
But then the DNS Zone editor, I'll just briefly show you the system I have here.
It does tell me that this is not hosted by us at site ground, which isn't exactly true.
Really, the truth is that the DNS records are not managed here because at the domain registrar and
the domain DNS provider, which I have at Cloudflare, I have the the traffic that goes to Vail, Sinochem
going to Cloudflare and getting all the benefits of that, that DNS provider that Cloudflare gives and
I will go about that will go over that later in the course.
And then I point traffic through Cloudflare over to this website right here.
So the name servers at that domain name are pointed to Cloudflare.
So all traffic goes through Cloudflare.
And then Cloudflare can then decide, well, you know, website traffic goes here to site ground.
And so I have an I have an IP address right here that the website traffic needs to use to go to this
site ground IP address.
And since this domain is registered to that IP address, I can then point traffic from Cloudflare straight
here.
It gives me the ability to point email traffic, for example, as in Emacs records or mail exchanger
records to a different server, if I want to.
And so right now, I still have these Emacs records at Cloudflare pointed to the the site ground records.
So I have at this point email hosted at this shared server, but I'm still taking advantage of Cloudflare.
And so that's a tour of the, you know, the site ground site tools for any web site that you have.
If you only have one website and maybe you're using the startup plan, then you only have one of these.
But if you have the the Groberg or the Go Geek plan and you can take advantage of having a site tools
area for each one of the web sites that you're hosting there.